The Project Gutenberg eBook of Jimmy Crow
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Jimmy Crow

Author: Edith Francis Foster

Release date: December 28, 2007 [eBook #24061]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Jason Isbell, Mark C. Orton, Christine D. and
        the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net (This file was made using scans of
        public domain works in the International Children's Digital
        Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JIMMY CROW ***




Produced by Jason Isbell, Mark C. Orton, Christine D. and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was made using scans of
public domain works in the International Children's Digital
Library.)










Transcriber's note words in [brackets] represent pictures in the
original.


  JIMMY CROW

  By
  Edith Francis Foster
  Published by
  Dana Estes & Co.

[Illustration]




UNIQUE AND INSTRUCTIVE BOOKS FOR YOUNG CHILDREN

Charming tales told in rebus form for wee men and women

  WHAT DID THE BLACK CAT DO? GUESS!
                      By MARGARET JOHNSON

  WHERE WAS THE LITTLE WHITE DOG?
                      By MARGARET JOHNSON

  JIMMY CROW          By EDITH FRANCIS FOSTER

Oblong quarto. Bound in cloth with separate cover design for each
volume

  DANA ESTES & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS
  Estes Press, Summer Street, Boston

[Illustration]




JIMMY CROW

BY EDITH FRANCIS FOSTER


[Illustration]

  BOSTON
  DANA ESTES & COMPANY
  PUBLISHERS

  _Copyright, 1899-1900_
  BY S. E. CASINO COMPANY

  _Copyright, April, 1902_
  BY DANA ESTES & COMPANY

  _All rights reserved_

JIMMY CROW

  Colonial Press
  Electrotyped and Printed by C. H. Simonds & Co
  Boston, Mass., U. S. A.

[TO DAVID]




CONTENTS

[CONTENTS.]

  FRONTISPIECE

  CONTENTS

  DEDICATION

  HOW JACK FOUND JIMMY CROW          9

  THE CHRISTMAS CANDLES             15

  AFTER THE SNOW STORM              21

  "THE ROSE IS RED"                 27

  DROPPING STITCHES                 33

  APRIL FOOL                        39

  JACK'S CIRCUS MONEY               45

  JIMMY'S CIRCUS                    51

  A WHOLE BUNCH OF CRACKERS         57

  JIMMY CROW'S BIRTHDAY PARTY       63

  IN SCHOOL                         69

  NUTTING                           75

  ENDPIECE

[HOW JACK FOUND JIMMY CROW.]

JIMMY CROW.




I.


Jimmy Crow belongs to Jack.

Jack is a little [boy]. Jimmy is a big [crow]. Jack wears a white
[suit]. Jimmy wears black [feathers]. Jack says "Good Morning," and
"Yes, sir," and "Thank you." Jimmy can say only "Caw, caw." Jack
thinks Jimmy is a funnier pet than a [cat] or a [dog].

One day, last summer, Jack was picking low [berries] in the pasture,
when he saw a young [crow] hopping in the bushes. The little crow was
lame in one [leg]. He had fallen from the [nest]. He was too young to
fly far, so [Jack] caught him. He carried him home in his
berry-[basket]. Then Jack took a [hammer] and [nails] and [wood] and
built a [cage]. He named his new pet "Jimmy Crow."

Jack took good care of Jimmy Crow. He caught [crickets] for him to
eat, and gave him fresh water in a tin [cup]. Jimmy's lame leg soon got
well. His [wings] grew big, and he could fly. When Jack called, Jimmy
would fly to him and perch on his [hand] or [head].

Jimmy Crow liked mischief. He liked to hide things and see people hunt
for them. Once when Jack was getting ready for school, he could not
find his [top]. He hunted till Mama said he must put on his rubber
[boots] and be off. One of those boots would not go on. There was
something in the toe. [Jack] held it up and shook it, and out
fell--the top! [Jimmy Crow] flapped his [wings] and cried "Caw, caw!"
That was his way of laughing. Jack laughed too, as he took his [books]
and [hat] and hurried off. [Edith Francis Foster]

[THE CHRISTMAS CANDLES]


JIMMY CROW.




II.


Grandma lives at Jack's [house]. She has a bird, too. Grandma's bird
is a green [parrot]. The parrot's name is "Pepper." [Jack] loves
[Grandma], but Jack's crow does not love Grandma's parrot.

Pepper can talk like a [man], mew like a [cat], bark like a [dog]. She
can cry and laugh. When Jimmy says "Caw, caw!" Pepper says "C-a-w,
c-a-w!" and then laughs. [Jimmy crow] doesn't like to be laughed at.
Once he flew at Pepper, and pushed her off her [perch]. But Pepper
scratched him with her [talons] and pulled out a tail-feather with her
[beak]. Now Jimmy keeps away from her, unless he wants to steal her
[crackers].

On Christmas Eve [children] came to Jack's Tree. Mama had trimmed it
with [popcorn] and [candles], and hung [presents] everywhere. When she
went with a [match] to light the candles, they were gone! "Where are
the candles?" cried [Mama]. "Somebody has carried them off, and I
can't light the [Christmas tree]." Betty, the littlest girl, began to
cry--two [tears] ran down her cheeks. [Pepper the parrot] sat on her
perch cracking a [nut]. When she heard the outcry, she dropped it and
screamed "Jimmy Crow, Jimmy Crow! Oh, oh! Oh, oh!" "Oh, naughty
[Jimmy Crow]!" said Mama. "He has hidden them. Pepper is telling
tales. Run, [children], and hunt! We'll play a new game, 'Hunt the
[candle].'"

Eight pairs of [feet] ran "up stairs, down [stairs], in my lady's
chamber." At last Betty tipped over a [basket], and out rolled the
[candles]. The littlest girl had won! So [Mama] held her up, and she
lit the Christmas Tree. [Edith Francis Foster]

[AFTER THE SNOW STORM.]


JIMMY CROW.




III.


Just after Christmas there was a great [snow] storm. The drifts were
higher than the [fence]. When it cleared off, [Jack] put on [his cap]
and reefer, [mittens] and rubber boots, and went out. [Jimmy Crow]
went with him. First, Jack took [shovel] and [broom] and made a wide
clean path to the [gate]. This was "working for Mama." Jack likes to
work for Papa and Mama. Then [friends] came to play with him, and they
had a fine frolic. They rolled big [snowballs], and built a [snowman].
They put an old [hat] on his head and the [shovel] over his shoulder.
Then Jack rang the [bell], and Mama came to the door. "Here is a man
with a shovel," he said. "Don't you want him to shovel paths for
you?"

"I might," laughed [Mama], "but somebody has been ahead of him--and
here are four hot [donuts] for that smart somebody." Jack gave the
other boys [donuts], and they all sat down on the [steps] to eat them.
[Jimmy Crow] sat on the [fence post]. He begged till each boy gave him
a [piece].

Then they made a pile of [snowballs] to throw at the snowman. Just as
Bob threw one, Jimmy Crow lit on the shoulder of the [snowman], and
the [snowball] knocked him off into a deep drift! [Jimmy Crow] was not
hurt, but he was angry. He flew at [Bob], and carried off his [cap] in
his [beak], and dropped it into that same deep [snowdrift]. Then [Bob]
had to wade through snow over his [boots], to get his cap again. And
Jimmy Crow perched on Jack's [head], flapped his wings, and laughed
"C-a-w, c-a-w, c-a-w!" [Edith Francis Foster]

["THE ROSE IS RED"]

JIMMY CROW.




IV.


"Tomorrow is St Valentine's day," said [Jack]. "Whom can I send a
[card] to, Mama?" "Who is the nicest little [girl] you know?" asked
[Mama]. Jack tried to think. "I guess it's the one in the big brick
[house]," he said. "Her hair is curly, and she gave me an [apple] when
I climbed the [tree] for her [kitten]. Her name is Kitty, too, and
that's a pretty name."

So Mama took a sheet of [folded paper] and painted [flowers] all
around it, with two little [doves] at the top; and Jack wrote a verse
in the middle, with pictures--like this story. "Dear Kitty; The [rose]
is red, the [violet] blue--I like [kittens] so I like you. Yours
truly, J." Then he put it in an [envelope] and went out to send it.
[Jimmy Crow] went too.

Of course Jack could not carry it himself, or Kitty would know who
sent it. So he tied it around [Jimmy Crow]'s neck. When they reached
Kitty's house he set him down on the [steps] and rang the bell. Then
he ran and hid behind the [gatepost].

The [door] opened quickly, for Kitty was just coming out with her
sled. She looked all around but she could only see [Jimmy Crow], busy
picking a bone her [kitten] had left there. Then she caught sight of
the [envelope], and untied it. She dropped her [sled rope] and the
[sled] slid down the steps and away to the gate. Jack jumped out and
caught it. "Oh, what a pretty [card]!" cried Kitty. "Thank you, Jack."
"No, no!" said [Jack] in a hurry. "You mustn't know it's me." "Well,
then, thank _you_, Jimmy," laughed [Kitty]. "Now let's go sliding."
"All right," said Jack. He put [Jimmy Crow] on the sled and off they
all went. [Edith Francis Foster]

[DROPPING STITCHES.]


JIMMY CROW.




V.


One day, [Grandma] sat down to knit on Jack's [stocking], and found
one [needle] was gone. "Oh dear, that's too bad!" said she. "All the
stitches dropped!" Pepper giggled, "Too bad, too bad!"

Grandma looked into her [basket], and under the [table]--and when she
got up [two needles] were gone. "Dear, dear!" said she. "Where do
they go?" [Pepper] giggled louder, and called, "Dear, dear! Too bad!"

Grandma looked behind her [chair], and under the [rug]--and when she
came back [three needles] were gone. "Dearie me!" she cried, and held
up both [hands]. Pepper giggled and giggled, and shrieked, "Dearie me!
Jimmy Crow!" "Why, yes," cried Grandma, "[Jimmy Crow] is the thief, of
course. Now where has he hid them?"

Just then he flew down and tried to pull out the last [needle].
Grandma saw him, and called Jack. [Jack] looked in the [coal scuttle],
he crawled under the [couch], he climbed on a [chair] and reached into
the [vases] on the [mantel]. Jimmy Crow hopped about him and chuckled
softly, "Caw, caw!"

Then [Pepper] giggled and cried out, "Jimmy-Jimmy wants a [cracker]!"
"Oh, yes," said Jack, "let's give Jimmy a [cracker], and see where he
takes it." Jimmy carried the cookie to the top of the [cupboard].
"That's the place. I'll get the [ladder]," Jack laughed. When he had
climbed to the top, he shouted, "Grandma! Here are the [needles]--and
all the other things we have lost--your [pouch], and the [spoon], and
my [mitten]--and--lots of things!" As he came down with both hands
full, Jimmy fluttered about his [head], and Pepper giggled and
shrieked. [Edith Francis Foster]

[APRIL FOOL!]


JIMMY CROW.




VI.


Jack's Mama was making [pies]. "Please, Jack," said she, "get me some
cold water." Jack took his [pail] and went out to the [pump]. Jimmy
Crow went too. He sat on Jack's [shoulder], bouncing up and down as
Jack worked the [handle].

Then [Jack] took the [cup] which hung on a [nail] and filled it at
the [pump]. But as it touched his [lips], Jimmy reached round and
snatched it, and flew up into the big cherry [tree]. "April-Fool!"
called out Pepper from Grandma's window.

Jack was vexed. "Bring that back!" he shouted--but [Jimmy Crow] only
chuckled. Jack jumped on a [barrel], and began to climb the tree. Just
as he reached up to grab Jimmy's [leg] Jimmy hopped to the next
[branch] higher, tipping the [cup], and all the water splashed down
into Jack's [face]. "April-April-Fool!" cried [Pepper] from the
[window]. Jack felt more vexed than ever. He dropped his [hat] and
hurried, but Jimmy hopped as fast as [Jack] climbed, till they reached
the top of the tree. Then, just as Jack thought he had him, [Jimmy
Crow] dropped the [cup], bang! on his [nose], and flew off to the
[chimney] of the [house].

"Oh, you bad Jimmy!" cried Jack, and started to climb down again. And
all the way Pepper screamed, "April-April-Fool!" and giggled and
giggled till [Jack] had to laugh too.

Then he carried in the [pail] of water, and told [Mama] all about it.
"I didn't mean to get fooled once today," said he, "but [Jimmy Crow]
has fooled me three times already."

They both laughed, and Mama gave him a whole little apple [pie], baked
in a [dish]. [Edith Francis Foster]

[JACK'S CIRCUS MONEY.]

JIMMY CROW.




VII.


The circus was coming! Jack wanted to go, but he had spent all his
[money] for [candy] and a [kite].

"Shall I give you twenty-five cents now," asked [Mama] as she took out
her [wallet], "or will you earn it?" "I'll earn it, with my own
[hands]," said [Jack]. "It's more fun to spend money you have worked
for." "Then you may weed the [onions] and [carrots] for me," said
Mama.

Jack put on his [jacket] and went into the garden. Jimmy Crow went
too. [Jimmy Crow] ate [beetles] and a [caterpillar], and then perched
on the [lawn mower] and watched [Jack] work.

When the job was done Mama paid him his quarter. First he sat on the
[wheelbarrow] and spun the coin like a [top]. Then he began to toss it
up in the air, and catch it in his [cap] as it fell.

The second time he didn't catch it--but [Jimmy Crow] did, and flew off
with it. [Jack] ran after him, shouting, "Stop thief!" He chased him
through the [berry]-bushes and across the [strawberry]-bed, to the
orchard [wall]. There Jimmy sat till Jack came up, then he dropped the
quarter into a [crack] between the stones. Jack heard it rattle down
to the ground.

Then [Jack] had to work hard! He pulled away the [stones] till he
could see it, between two big rocks, but couldn't get his [hand] in.
So he took a [stick] and poked. At last, out rolled the quarter--and
out hopped a [toad]! Jack laughed, but [Jimmy Crow] was so surprised
he flapped his [wings] and croaked.

Just then Bob came up. "Did your mother give you that?" he asked.
"No," said [Jack], "I earned it, for the circus--and [Jimmy Crow] made
me earn it over again!" [Edith Francis Foster]

[JIMMY'S CIRCUS.]

JIMMY CROW.




VIII.


Such a fine circus! Jack and Bob went, but [Jimmy Crow] was left at
home. The [two boys] bought [a bag of peanuts] and fed the [elephant]
and [monkeys]. Jack put his [hand] full of nuts between the bars, and
a little brown [monkey] pulled his [fingers] open and picked out the
[peanuts].

Then they saw the grand parade in the big [tent]--the [elephant], the
[camel], the [giraffe], the [zebra], the [cages] with [lions], and
[tigers], the [hippopotamus] and the [bear]. Then a pretty [lady] rode
a white [horse], standing up on the [saddle] and waving a [flag].
Other horses ran races, and jumped, and walked upright. The funny
[clown] tried to ride a little [donkey], and kept tumbling off.

At the last, all the animals marched round again, and a funny thing
happened. A big black [crow] came flying into the [tent] and lighted
right on the [elephant]'s back. He spread his [wings], and danced up
and down in time to the [marching band]. The people thought he was
part of the circus, and clapped their [hands] and laughed, but [Jack]
ran out into the ring, crying, "Oh, he's mine, he's mine! Please let
me have him!"

The [clown] got a [ladder] and climbed up the elephant, but [Jimmy
Crow] kept out of his reach, and everybody laughed. So he came
tumbling down again, and told Jack to try it. [Jack] climbed up and
crept along to the elephant's head--and then Jimmy flew up on his
shoulder, and the [audience] clapped louder still. When Jack came
down, the [clown] fished a penny out of his pocket, and offered to buy
Jimmy Crow. "No, sir!" said [Jack]. "Not for a hundred dollars! I'd
rather have my crow than this whole circus." [Edith Francis Foster]

[A WHOLE BUNCH OF CRACKERS!]


JIMMY CROW.




IX.


HURRAH for the Fourth! Jack was out of [bed] before the [sun] rose. He
could not wait for breakfast, but drank a [cup] of milk, and ran out
to find the other [boys]. Jimmy Crow went too. Bob and Russell came up
just then, with their pockets full of [firecrackers], and they all
began firing them on the lawn. [Jimmy Crow] liked the little red
things, and begged for some, but the boys only laughed at him.

Pretty soon [Jack] lighted a whole [string of firecrackers], and threw
it down, and all the [boys] ran away. Then [Jimmy Crow] saw his
chance, and he seized the bunch of crackers and flew in at Grandma's
open window!

He lighted on Pepper's [perch]. [Pepper] tried to bite him, but bang!
went a [firecracker]!

Both [birds] jumped, and Jimmy dropped the bunch on the carpet. Bang!
went another [firecracker], and bang! bang! went [two firecrackers].
Then a dozen flew out, banging, over the floor.

"Caw! Caw!" screamed [Jimmy Crow]. "Fire! Fire!" screamed [Pepper].
"Jack! Jack!" screamed [Grandma]. She was trying to pick up the bunch
with the [fire tongs], when [Jack] ran in. He threw a [rug] over the
[string of firecrackers], gathered them up in it, and threw all out
of the [window]. [Grandma] sat down in her arm-[chair] very pale. Jack
kissed her. "I'm sorry we scared you so," he said. "Now you rest while
I clear up."

He brought the [brush] and [dustpan], and swept up the litter. Then he
gave [Pepper the parrot] a [peanut] and took [Jimmy Crow] under his
[arm]. "Pepper didn't 'want a _cracker_,' that time, did she,
Grandma?" said he. "Now we'll go further away." But just then the
breakfast [bell] rang. [Edith Francis Foster]

[JIMMY CROW'S BIRTHDAY PARTY.]


JIMMY CROW.




X.


"It was a year ago today I found [Jimmy Crow]," said Jack. "He must
have a 'birthday' party." So [Jack] invited the [children] he and
Jimmy liked best to "Jimmy's picnic."

They all went up to the [berry]-pasture where Jack found [Jimmy Crow].
First there was little Ibelle, carrying Jimmy Crow in her [arms]. Next
came her big brother Alden, who had a [basket] with [six pears] in
it. Louise had [six sticks of candy] in a [bag], and Bob brought [six
donuts] in a [box]. Russell carried [six cookies] in a [parcel], and
last came Jack with a tin [bucket]. Nobody knew what was in it. That
was Mama's "surprise."

They sat down under a shady [tree] and divided the goodies. [Jimmy
Crow] sat in the middle, and they each gave him a piece. After they
had all eaten a [stick of candy] and [donut] and [pear] and [cookie],
Jack opened the [bucket]. The children all put their [heads] close
together to see, and as the [lid] came off they shouted, "Oh, oh!
Ice-cream!"

Then they sat down again in a circle, [Jack] in the middle, with a
[spoon]. He gave each one a [spoonful of ice-cream] in turn. Oh, how
good it tasted!

But [Jimmy Crow] wanted some, and when Jack would not let him eat from
the spoon, he grabbed it in his [beak] and flew away. The [children]
chased him until he dropped it, and then gave him a taste of the
ice-cream. He didn't like it, so the [children] ate it all.

Then they picked [berries], until Alden's [basket] and Bob's [box] and
Louise's [bag] were all full.

Just as they were starting home, a little tired after all the
fun--"Hurrah!" shouted Russell. "Here comes Uncle Charlie, with his
[wagon]. He will give us a ride." So kind [Uncle Charlie] tossed them
up into the hay, one by one--little Ibelle first--and they all rode
home on the [hay]. [Edith Francis Foster]

[IN SCHOOL.]


JIMMY CROW.




XI.


The first day Jack went to school in the fall, [Jimmy Crow] was very
lonesome. The [school] was near by, and about noon he flew over and
hopped in at the open [window].

All the [children] were bending over their [desks], writing, but Jimmy
knew Jack's [back] as well as his [front], and lighted on his [head].
The children laughed at that, and the [teacher] laughed too. Then she
said, "If Jimmy Crow does not disturb anyone, he may stay, as it is
nearly noon." The children promised not to be disturbed, and the
[pencils] went to work again. [Jimmy Crow] behaved beautifully, though
at first he tried to walk on Jack's [paper] and to bite his pencil.
Jack pushed him away, and he flew to the teacher's [desk] where he
walked about quietly, looking at the [books] and [vase] of [flowers].
When the lesson was finished, the teacher said, "Jack may collect the
[pencils]." He got the [pencil box] and began, but Jimmy flew ahead of
him, and picked up a pencil. Jack took it, and put it in the box. Then
[Jimmy Crow] brought another. The [children] were delighted. They held
their pencils in their [outstretched hands], and Jimmy Crow collected
them all.

Then the [bell] rang and the children marched out for [hats] [bows]
and [jackets]. When they came back, Jimmy Crow was gone! [Jack] looked
under the [desks] and in the [waste-basket]. Then the [teacher] looked
in her closet, and there he sat on a [clothes-hook]. He had found her
lunch-[basket], and eaten a whole [bunch of grapes]. Jack was very
sorry, but the teacher only laughed.

That afternoon Jimmy did not go to school, but [Jack] brought her a
big red [apple] and said it was from [Jimmy Crow]. [Edith Francis
Foster]

[NUTTING.]


JIMMY CROW.




XII.


One bright, frosty, October morning Jack went up to the walnut [tree]
in the pasture to gather [walnuts]. Jimmy Crow went too. Jack drew his
little [cart], and [Jimmy Crow] rode on the [seat]. [Jack] picked up
all the nuts on the ground, then climbed the tree and shook down more,
still in their thick, green [husks].

When he came down, [Jimmy Crow] was busily picking up the nuts and
dropping them into a [hole] in the tree. "Stop that!" cried Jack.
"These are _my_ [nuts]. The [squirrels] can pick for themselves." "Caw,
caw!" said Jimmy Crow.

Jack took home a [cart]-load. Then he brought a [ladder] and spread
the nuts out on the [roof] of the [barn] to dry the husks.

Toward night Jack took [Mama] out to look at his [nuts]. Half of them
were gone! "Oh dear!" said Jack, "It is [Jimmy Crow] again. Now where
has he put them all?" Just then he saw Jimmy's [tail feathers]
disappear into the [barn]. He ran after, but could see no nuts--only
an old [wagon]. He climbed up on the [wagon], but found no nuts
inside--only a [barrel], lying on its side. He reached into the barrel
and felt nothing but a [basket]. He pulled it out and peeped into
it--and at last he had found the [nuts]! And Jimmy Crow perched on
his [shoulder] and laughed, "Caw, caw!" When the nuts had all been
carried back to the [barn], and [Mama] had praised Jack's work, she
said, "Now we must hurry in to supper. The [sun] has set and it is
getting late and cold. Let us run, to keep warm." So she and [Jack]
took [hands] and ran all the way back to the [house]. Then they went
in to their supper--and [Jimmy Crow] went too.

["AND JIMMY CROW WENT TOO!"]








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JIMMY CROW ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


